---
date: 2021-04-24T23:06
---

# What is Malware?

Malware are a piece of software or program used to performs malicious
actions on a target.

**Mal**icious + soft**ware** = _malware_

Malware infect any kind of device: computer, phone, tabletâ€¦

## Basic Components of Malware

**Crypter**: software that conceal the existence of malware. Used to elude
antivirus from detecting it. Also protects the malware against reverse
engineering analysis.

**Downloader**: piece of software that download the malware. Can be another
malware or trojan or a simple script.

**Dropper**: install malware or some code on the system covertly. Uses
unidentifiable malware code that's undetected by antivirus scanners.

**Exploit**: the part of the malware that contains the code or the sequence
of commands that it takes to take advantage of the device. It's the code
used to breach the system securely. Exploits can be _local_ or _remote_.

**Injector**: injects the exploit or code form the malware into the system.
Hide or prevent the malware from being removed. Reloads the malware if
necessary.

**Obfuscators**: conceal the malware or the malicious code by mean of
different techniques. Makes it harder for program and/or professionnal to
find and remove the malware.

**Packer**: compress the malware file and converts it to an unreadable
format so that it cannot be detected.

**Payload**: the actual file that is activated, used to delete files infect
the system, encrypt the system etc.

**Malicious Code**: defines the basic functionality of the malware and
include the commands that result in the security breaches itself. Can be
ActiveX control, Java appletm browser plugins etc.

## Types of Malware

### Propagation Malware

**Virus**: requires human assistance, meaning one needs to execute the file
in order to get infected.

**Worms**: automatic; squirms throughout network infrastructure without
human help.

### Concealment Malware

**Rootkit**: hides itself by modifying the OS so it's not visible to the
end user.

**Trojan**: hidden inside a disired file.

## History Bits

In 1996, the first federal computer sabotage case took place. Timothy
Lloyd, a network manager and administrator for Omega Engineering created
what is called a _logic bomb_: he created a user account that was called
`12345` with no password and full administrator rights. His logic bomb
would execute if he didn't login for 20 days, using the `12345` account to
login and execute a script called `fix` that would delete files, and purge
it to hide his tracks. As Omega Engineering did business with United States
Navy and NASA, the Secret Service had to get involved. They found the same
logic bomb in Lloyd personal computer. He was convinced of computer
sabotage and sentenced to 41 months in federal prison.

## Things to Look For

On Microsoft Windows, every program with a PID higher than 2000 is launched
after the operating system fires up. This is generally where to pay
attention to.

If a task is not familiar, try opening it's location to see where it is
going. Look also for the `Details` tab of `Properties` which gives more
information about it. Searching online is also a good idea, when possible.

You should be suspicious of every task above 2000 that does not have an
icon.
