---
date: 2021-09-01T08:22
---

# Link/Data Link Layer

This layer concerns itself with identifying the device to which we want to
send the data to. The devices are any tangible devices found on the
physical network such as computers, switches, and routers.

This layer works like an **interface** between the physical layer and the
logical layer above it.

The most commonly used and most famous protocol on this layer is the
**Ethernet** protocol, governed by the [IEEE
standards](https://standards.ieee.org/standard/802_3-2018.html).

Ethernet works using concepts called **framing** and **addressing**. We
will review both.

## Ethernet Frames

Ethernet Frames are a Protocol Data Unit (see #[[networking-models]]) which
encapsulate data from the Internet/Network layer above.

{.ui .message .info}
The Link/Data Link layer is the lowest layer at which encapsulation takes
place.

On the physical layer, the data is a stream of bits without logical
structure. An Ethernet Frame adds this missing structure to this binary
data. The structure defines which bits are _data payload_ and which are
_metadata_ (header or trailer/footer).

{.ui .message .info}
The purpose of the Layer 2 header is to get the data from hop to hop.

Ethernet-compliant device can identify the different parts of a frame
because each "fields" of data have a specific lengths in bytes, and appear
in an order. The frame described below follows the IEEE 802.3 Ethernet
standard.

```txt
+---------------+----------+--------+------+------+---------+--------+-----+
|               |          |        |      |      |         |        |     |
|  Destination  |  Source  |        |      |      |         |        |     |
|      MAC      |   MAC    | Length | DSAP | SSAP | Control |  Data  | FCS |
|  Destination  |  Source  |        |      |      |         |        |     |
|               |          |        |      |      |         |        |     |
+---------------+----------+--------+------+------+---------+--------+-----+
 ^                                                         ^ ^      ^ ^   ^
 |                                                         | |      | |   |
  \__________________________+____________________________/   \____/   \_/
                             |                                  |       |
                        Frame header                       Data Payload |
                                                                        |
                                                            Frame footer/trailer
```

Note that the fields length are not at scale. _Destination_, _Source_ and
_Data_ are normaly longer than the other field.

Here is a rundown of all the field:

- **Preamble and Start of Frame Delimiter (SFD):** Not actual part of the
frame but sent prior to the frame to let the receiving device to exoect
frane comming next.
- **Source and Destination MAC address:** Six bytes (48 bits) long fields
each containing respectively the MAC address of the device that created the
frame (can vary depending on where the data travels) and the MAC address of
the device the data is ultimately intended. See [[mac-addresses]]#.
- **Length:** Two bytes (16 bits) length to indicate the size of the Data
Payload
- **DSAP, SSAP, Control:** One byte (8 bits) length each, used to identify
the Network Protocol used for the Data Payload and additional information
about the communication mode for the frame.
- **Data Payload:** Between 42 and 1497 bytes in length, contains the data
for the PDU from the layer above.
- **Frame Check Sequence (FCS):** The final four bytes (32 bits) is a
checksum generated by the device which created the frame. It is used by the
receiving end to check if even one bit of the frame data was modified/lost
along the way. If the check don't match, the frame is dropped. Note that
**Ethernet doesn't implement a retransmission functionality for dropped
frames.** This is the responsability of higher level protocols to manage
retransmission (if this is even a requirement of the protocol).
- **Interframe Gap (IFG):** Like the Preamble/SFD, this is not part of the
frame. This is a brief pause between each frame transmission to let the
receiver prepare for the next frame. The length varies according to the
capability of the Ethernet connection but it contributes to the delay
(latency, see [[physical-network]])

{.ui .message .info}
Developer should mainly concern themselves with **Source and Destination
MAC address** being used to direct the frame between network devices and
**Data Payload** being used as an encapsulation mechanism for the layer
above.
